[Battlefield tanks are really only half the battle. Beyond military might on the ground in Ukraine, there is another critical confrontation in which the Kremlin has a superiority that must be challenged. The information war., Russia’s media space has reverted to a grotesque parody of the Soviet-era model. (In fact, it’s far worse, as in the latter Soviet years at least, most people knew they were being fed lies). Television and the domestic press is utterly captured. Millions are fed a daily diet of Ukrainian “fascists”, western pederasts, and nuclear revenge on Anglo-Saxon civilisation., It’s working. A broad consensus inside Russia still supports Putin and his wretched campaign in Ukraine. The Kremlin may be making a hash of the war on the ground, but it is winning the propaganda battle., There is, however, a tiny minority of courageous journalists who are trying to make a difference, publishing independent, credible news for audiences back at home. It isn’t easy. They have been blocked, banned, bullied and banished from Russia. They have been condemned as foreign agents and “undesirables”, and their journalists, funders and readers have been threatened. They sit in exile, short of staff, advertisers and revenue. But not short of readers., Independent news websites such as Meduza and Holod say they still reach millions of unique browsers in Russia, thanks to mirror websites, virtual private networks (VPNs) that can dodge the censors, and hard-to-block channels like email and Telegram., I visited senior editors from both in Riga last week as part of a Guardian Foundation project to compare notes and offer advice on how to fund independent journalism. Meduza’s editor-in-chief, Galina Timchenko, told me it was like a game of cat and mouse: each time she came up with a new way of distributing news in Russia, the authorities shut it down. And yet Meduza still claimed about 2.5 million unique browsers monthly in Russia last year., Holod’s editor, Taisia Bekbulatova, said shoring up independent Russian journalism was a vital part of saving Russia from itself., “Our goal is to preserve independent journalism for the future of Russia,” Bekbulatova told me. “Despite having to work in exile, we believe in the importance of high-quality journalism and the possibility of destroying a dictatorship. We want to be not just a media, but a true institution of independent journalism.”, For a western world agonising over how to make a difference in the Ukraine war, supporting journalists like this seems an obvious opportunity. In the same way that millions of readers have supported Guardian journalism over the years because they recognise the importance of independent media to the functioning of democracy, the same obtains in Russia., We can help outfits like Meduza and Holod easily, for the fraction of the cost of a Leopard tank. The hope has to be that flourishing independent Russian news organisations might persuade ever greater numbers to question the Kremlin’s lies. Glasnost has impeccable form in this regard.,  Mark Rice-Oxley is the Guardian’s executive editor for supporters and a former Moscow correspondent, <em>You can find out more here about supporting Holod and Meduza</em>][For a film that has, if you want to be blunt about it, tanked at the box office, Tár has provoked a disproportionate amount of conversation. It’s possible that the discourse around the film – about a powerful, highly successful and extremely problematic conductor called Lydia Tár, played by Cate Blanchett – is as interesting as the film itself., I’ve heard multiple, conflicting interpretations of Tár: that it’s a disgraceful misrepresentation of the field of classical music; that it’s all too real; that it’s all too surreal; that it carries an intellectual heft that is rare at the movies; that it’s not half as clever as it thinks it is; that it’s not about conducting, it’s about power; that it’s not about power, it’s about narcissism; that it’s about a clash of ethics between the generations; that it’s about third-wave feminism; that its central character, in all her “unlikeability”, is arrestingly complex; that its central character is irredeemably hateful; that it’s a fascinating, even-handed anatomisation of “cancel culture”; that it is actually a “regressive” movie that takes “bitter aim” at identity politics. Then there is an extensive online debate devoted to decoding its eerie final act. There’s something exciting about a film that is such an open text, that demands so much discussion., It is not unproblematic, though. The classical music world is talking about Tár, and not in a good way. (A leading London conservatoire, for example, politely declined to host the UK premiere.) The anxiety derives, not least, from the fact that the biography of the central character bears more than a passing resemblance to that of conductor Marin Alsop. Like Tár she is American, was mentored by Leonard Bernstein, is a lesbian, is partner to and co-parent with a sometime orchestral player, and created a foundation for early-career female conductors. Alsop herself has criticised the film, and I have some sympathy with her. Tár, among other things, is a bully and an abuser, and Alsop is not. Her wider point, though, is that a tiny handful of women have struggled to push through into big roles in conducting. Of those who have “made it”, some are, for sure, pleasanter and better behaved than others. But of them, literally none are moulded like the fictional Tár. The kind of abuse committed by Tár – blackballing, using power to extract sex – is unhappily present in classical music, but the perpetrators, known largely by rumour and word-of-mouth rather than, yet, by open accusation, are men. Women in classical music may be bullies and behave appallingly. But none to my knowledge has allegations of abuse hovering over them of the kind that, for example, resulted in the firing of the late James Levine from his post at the Metropolitan Opera., The counter-argument to this perspective is that the film isn’t really “about” classical music in any meaningful way, and that its setting is incidental to its purpose. But that would be to overlook the fact that the film does, in fact, want to tell us something about art, and artworks about art often have an intriguing meta-narrative to tell. Consider other films set in the world of classical music, or adjacent to it. There’s Amadeus, of course; Michael Haneke’s The Piano Teacher, François Truffaut’s Shoot the Piano Player, Denis Dercourt’s The Page Turner, the Du Pré biopic, Hilary and Jackie, Shine, A Late Quartet (memorably with Philip Seymour Hoffman as an embittered second violinist). What do they have in common? Here’s a clue: the main characters in George Cukor’s Gaslight – the film that has given its name to a whole form of abuse – are an aspiring opera singer and a pianist., Not all of these films are about abuse and violence, but all of them deal, in one way or another, with obsession and mental illness. I can’t escape the notion that for film-makers, classical music offers a means of representing some of their darkest, most twisted thoughts about art and creativity. In a way, one can see why: of all the corners of the interlocking artistic worlds, classical music, along with ballet, requires the most rarefied, intense form of lifelong commitment. It offers to creators of fiction an extreme version of artmaking., Films about cinema, by contrast, tend to be coloured by nostalgia or sentimentality (think of La La Land, or Sam Mendes’ new Empire of Light). Steven Spielberg’s latest film, The Fabelmans, co-written with Tony Kushner, has a little of both: it is, really, Spielberg’s own Bildungsroman, even origin myth, and – of course! – there is an early moment in which the main character, Sam, goes to the cinema for the first time as a child. Naturally, we see the reflected light from the screen play over his face; naturally, by these means, the flicks indelibly work their sorcery on him., The Fabelmans is much more interesting than this description suggests, and, like Tár, it has something to say about power, in this case that which is invested in the bearer of the movie camera – the unwilling holder of secrets, the hero-maker, the manipulator. Classical music is also invoked in the movie, through Sam’s mother, a thwarted pianist, and again it occupies that familiar thematic territory of loss and mental illness. The Fabelmans, however, is touching and accurate on what art actually is, and feels like, and consists of. There’s a lovely hint of this in its punning nomenclature: the name Spielberg is reminiscent of the German or Yiddish for “play”; the word Fabelman of the word for “story”. In this movie, stories arise out of play: there is a clear line from Sam’s first films, made for fun with his fellow boy scouts, to the work for which the real Spielberg is known., Joy, playfulness: these are qualities entirely absent from the vision of art presented by Todd Field’s Tár, perhaps deliberately. Lydia Tár is a dictator – a model of power for conductors that is in steep decline, and, in fact, largely out of reach for women, heavily predicated as it is on traditionally male patterns of authority. Most encounters between conductors and orchestral musicians actually operate, at their best, through collaboration and, yes, playfulness; conductors tend rather to use persuasiveness and charm than blunt command to bring forward their ideas. The balance of power is not wholly on conductors’ side: orchestral players can be pitiless to conductors they do not respect., There’s one film I have not mentioned that is about conductors and composers, and also ballet: Powell and Pressburger’s The Red Shoes (1948). Here too there is abuse, and obsession, and mental illness. Like The Fabelmans, like Tár, it suggests that art and domestic life may be impossible to reconcile. But unlike Tár, amid its darkness, it offers a joyous image of what it is to love art, be an artist, to be part of a company of performers. Unlike Tár, which invokes, rather than has anything particularly interesting to say about Mahler, The Red Shoes contains a strange and lovely artwork in itself in the form of the ballet-within-the-film that is also called The Red Shoes. It’s a film that has made generations of impressionable youngsters grow up into artists. Will Tár ever have that galvanising effect? Discuss.][He might have gone by the time you read this. He certainly should have. But we are in the age of shamelessness now, when revelations that would once have driven public figures to hide in mortified penance now prompt not so much as an apology, let alone a resignation., I’m speaking of the Conservative party chairman, Nadhim Zahawi, but not only him. For the proliferating questions about Zahawi’s finances, like those surrounding the appointment of the BBC chairman, Richard Sharp, point to a phenomenon that is both wider and deeper., The official line on Zahawi is what we might call the Sue Gray formulation: that we need to wait for the inquiry led by the independent adviser on ministerial standards, Laurie Magnus, to do its work. Tory MPs parrot that in public, but in private they’ve made up their minds. “I don’t know a single Conservative MP who believes he can survive,” says one – and you can see why., The available facts are damning enough. Zahawi paid a penalty to HM Revenue and Customs and, as the head of that body spelled out this week, that doesn’t happen for “innocent errors”. You have to have done something worse., Zahawi’s defenders have taken comfort in the word “careless”, to suggest that the Tory chairman was guilty of a mere slip-up. But HMRC uses that word in a precise way. “‘Careless’ means a failure to take reasonable care in relation to your tax affairs,” advises the official HMRC guidance, adding: “Carelessness can be likened to the longstanding concept in general law of ‘negligence’.” Put like that, it hardly sounds like a credential for the person once in charge of the public finances: yet Zahawi served as chancellor of the exchequer., Anyone who has filed a late tax return, or put a decimal point in the wrong place, might want to give Zahawi the benefit of the doubt. But it’s hard to do that when you recall that Zahawi did not admit his mistake straight away but, on the contrary, threatened to sue for libel those who first asked about it. For a politician to seek to intimidate those pursuing a legitimate inquiry should, in itself, be a disqualification for high office: a democracy relies on a free press, and a free press cannot function if those who exercise state power try to<strong> </strong>use their personal financial muscle to prevent scrutiny., When asked about his own tax history on Friday, the current chancellor breezily offered that he didn’t think that “people at home are remotely interested in personal tax affairs”. I suspect the opposite is true: that they are highly interested in the tax affairs of those who determine how much everyone else pays in tax – and then spend that money. At the very least, they will want to know that the people making those decisions are paying what they themselves owe. And they will not be remotely tolerant of someone who issued menaces, branding as false and defamatory what was in fact true., Sunak can be grateful to Zahawi for one thing, though. He has diverted attention away from Sharp, appointed by Boris Johnson’s government to chair the BBC a matter of weeks after he had helped secure an £800,000 loan to Johnson. If that sounds cosy, consider that Sharp, a good chum of the former PM, is now the subject of an inquiry headed by a man who, like Johnson, is an Old Etonian, right-of-centre journalist: namely William Shawcross, who serves as the commissioner for public appointments. Shawcross’s daughter happens to be head of the policy unit in Downing Street. And let’s not forget that the loan Sharp helped organise came from Johnson’s distant cousin. Snug, no?, This, too, is a case that can be settled before any inquiry reports. The key fact is already known: Sharp did a big favour for the PM, yet did not tell the panel that appointed him, even though he was required to declare anything that might even be perceived as a conflict of interest. Sharp says there was no such conflict, echoed by Johnson himself, who minted a Borisism specially for the occasion: “I can tell you that for 100% ding-dang sure.” , But these two cannot be the judge in their own case. Sharp simultaneously saw enough of a problem in acting as a loan-broker for the PM that he promised the cabinet secretary he would stay out of it from that point on – and yet not enough of a problem to mention it to the committee handing out a plum job. That silence is itself disqualifying., Sunak will hope all this whistles past a public that has more immediate troubles on its mind. But that misses the point. Because what cuts through from all of this is the unbelievable sums of money involved. The minds of most Britons will boggle at a world where someone can be “careless” on a tax bill to the tune of £5m. Five million! Where someone in a handsomely paid job can still need a personal loan of £800,000 – and get it, from a cousin he hardly knows. When millions of Britons are counting the pounds just to get through the week, deciding whether to eat or stay warm, the notion that their rulers are dealing in telephone-number sums of cash will confirm that, truly, they live on different planets., Allies of the PM insist that both the Zahawi and Sharp affairs are legacy scandals, leftovers from the Johnson era. But that hardly helps Sunak. First, because it advertises his own failure to make a break from that period, which would, admittedly, be difficult, given that he was there at Johnson’s side throughout. And second, because if the distance between regular voters and Tory politicians who enjoy enormous personal wealth is the question, then Sunak is hardly the answer. Mr and Mrs Sunak are the richest of the lot., Still, this goes deeper than the usual terrain of scandal and optics. The smell of corruption that has filled the nostrils this week blends with a stronger, more lingering sense of corrosion emanating from this government. An overburdened NHS barely able to cope; a rail network that is struggling to limp along, in the north of England especially; trains, schools, hospitals all hobbled by strikes – it adds up to a shared and spreading feeling that the country is broken, that the public realm in particular has been corroded, not least by more than a decade of starved budgets. , In his Bloomberg speech on Friday, Jeremy Hunt suggested it was “columnists from both left and right” who had been spreading angst with all their declinist talk. But the decline is real., And it is made vivid by the contrast with the fabulous wealth of those at the very top. In the 1950s, the economist John Kenneth Galbraith referred to “private affluence amid public squalor”. The phrase gained new currency in the 1990s, when Britons could see public services ailing even as the super-rich soared to ever greater heights. That’s the picture now, too. The private realm of Johnson and Sunak, Sharp and Zahawi – and many others – is so abundant, those who inhabit it can be careless about sums of money everyone else would regard as life-changing. Meanwhile, the country – the services that people rely on and which, in some way, define society itself – is descending into squalor. We cannot stomach the corruption, because we see the corrosion all around us.][It’s encouraging to see Liz Truss hoving back into view, after a period in the wilderness only slightly longer than that endured by the OG messiah. And, indeed, only slightly longer than her entire premiership. As one ally told the Financial Times of her abortive adventures in the public finances this week: “Liz believes that the policy was right but she didn’t get the political backing she needed.” Erm. Does that quite cover it? Having failed to get backing from her colleagues, the markets, business, the Bank of England, the public and experts from the Institute for Fiscal Studies and beyond, Liz was arguably a full six infinity stones short of a gauntlet., Still, it feels inevitable that another betrayal narrative should be cranking up. You can never have too many, can you? Having accidentally divested itself of various of its other manufacturing industries, the UK is now world-beating in producing betrayal narratives, with supporters of any number of the politicians who played a part in the rolling chaos of the past seven years still claiming that their standard bearer was falsely victimised by people who simply lacked their vision. British politics throws the best pity parties. Consider us the Valhalla of misunderstood heroes., Quite why this is the default narrative of UK public life is unclear, other than the fact the scorched-earth mess of it all has to be blamed on someone other than the people who just happened to be holding a blowtorch in the Westminster area at the time. The ranks of the betrayed grow ever larger, encompassing (but not limited to) such reverse luminaries as Truss and her chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng, Boris Johnson, Jeremy Corbyn and Nigel Farage. Acolytes of all the above believe their leaders’ visions have been betrayed by someone or other in one way or another, when the reality is they were undone by such trifles as “the voters”, “reality” and “the consequences of their own actions”., Alas, this is not how their various tribes continue to see it, with the preferred position being to blame someone or something else for the shortcomings. British politics has been a series of bin fires over the past few years, but the various factions would have you believe that if only <em>their</em> bin fire had been allowed to burn a little longer, a phoenix would have arisen from it. Within our politics, taking responsibility is dead as a concept. The result is a public realm where it is always someone else’s fault, and no mistakes, ever, can be conceded by operational figures., Only in this atmosphere could 102 Conservative MPs have believed last October that it was <em>finally</em> time for a return for Boris Johnson, who had vacated Downing Street in disgrace a full six weeks previously, after a series of self-generated scandals that had led to apoplectic public outcry and a downfall which had required 57 ministerial resignations over not much more than 48 hours to finally shift the blockage. When he chose not to formally run in the second leadership contest last year, Johnson’s supporters let it be known his betrayers were simply not yet sorry enough for what they had done. “Now is not the time for Boris,” one sniffed. “They will be desperate by June next year.” Certainly wouldn’t rule it out. Westminster outriders feeling wounded over what happened to Johnson are all over the place these days. On Brexit, they even seem to imagine he was betrayed by his own deal., Then again, Brexit is perhaps the richest source for betrayal narratives, with the ground being laid almost immediately after the vote. In 2017, Nigel Farage explained that if he didn’t get his perfect, shiftingly defined version of Brexit, he would “don khaki, pick up a rifle and head for the frontlines”. In fact, he’s farting out gin adverts and appearing on GB News and Cameo (where the platform describes him as “highly responsive” to requests to say any old shit for 73 quid). But he’s still finding time to assert betrayal, and perpetually hints he may even feel betrayed enough to return to the frontlines – of politics – someday in the not too distant future. Which will at least allow me to attend his 37th resignation speech in due course., Less politically successful but feeling no less betrayed are supporters of Jeremy Corbyn, who still blame the media for the former Labour leader’s failure to win two elections, the first against the worst candidate and campaign in recent memory, and the second (by a landslide) against Boris Johnson. Perhaps betrayal is easier to swallow than the idea that the last thing on earth anyone in the red wall was doing on the doorstep was regurgitating anything some twat like me had written in the Guardian. (Let’s face it, if newspaper commentary of any type were remotely market-moving, the columns warning people off Johnson – from left and right – might have effected something other than a massive majority in his favour in 2019.), So now the Trussites take their place among the furiously betrayed, despite the fact their leader left office having broken virtually every egg at her disposal, landing the UK with a vast bill and absolutely no prospect of an omelette. In fact, with nothing resembling an omelette having been served up for years now, it’s possible – just possible – that the real victims of betrayal are not all these politicians, but the public.][I have been working around the subject of the Holocaust for more than a decade at the Imperial War Museum. But generally this has been at a distance, researching in archives and institutions. Working on the BBC documentary How the Holocaust Began, released this week ahead of Holocaust Memorial Day, changed that. It took me to forgotten places, sites where historical details are still unknown and mysteries remain., There are still mass killings and mass graves about which we know little. Discovering this, and integrating it with the broader history I know, was a profound experience. , There can be a tendency sometimes to think of the Holocaust in very singular ways. It seems to be assumed that Hitler’s warped and abhorrent intentions were seamlessly translated into practical action by a cabal of loyal followers and enforced in purpose-built “camps”. There is also a sense that it was systemisation and bureaucratisation more than individual agency that propelled this process forward once it had begun. This idea is not only inaccurate; I think it’s dangerous., The Holocaust did not happen simply because Hitler willed it into being, but because there were enough people<strong> </strong>prepared to act on his intentions and align themselves with his ideology. It was not implemented as part of a preconceived masterplan that had always anticipated death camps as the ultimate destination; it evolved., The process by which this happened demanded effort, thought and consideration. Moreover, it required huge numbers of people – not just thousands, or tens of thousands even, but hundreds of thousands. These people gave Hitler the practical means to achieve his ideological vision. Hundreds of thousands of men and women who cooperated, in various ways, with the mass murder of 6 million men, women and children., For years it has been suggested that the people responsible for this were either acting on orders that they had no choice but to follow, or were so brainwashed they had no meaningful understanding of what they were doing. I have found very little evidence to suggest that this is the case. Indeed, what shocked me most about some of the accounts I heard while filming was not just how much collaboration and compliance there was, but how readily this was offered. The path to genocide did not seamlessly unfold in front of those who walked along it: they had to build it for themselves., From the very first shootings at the beginning of the German invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, those on the ground did not wait for orders from Berlin to determine action – they used their own initiative., Hitler’s Wehrmacht forces were followed into the Soviet Union by four specially assembled SS units called Einsatzgruppen. These units were given instructions to identify and eliminate Hitler’s political enemies. Initially, their primary focus was Bolsheviks, but under the tenets of Hitler’s belief that Bolshevism was a Jewish conspiracy, this swiftly evolved to encompass all Jews., Visiting the site of one of these first acts of mass murder at the Lithuanian town of Gargždai was a sobering experience. In the years since the war, housing has built around the place where Lieutenant Hans-Joachim Böhme ordered 200 Jews to be shot on the afternoon of 24 June 1941. Today there is a memorial, but it is hard to find. All remnants of the Jewish community who lived on the site are gone., Gargždai speaks to the foundational moments where the Nazis’ violent persecution of Jewish people became explicitly murderous. Those killed were not the first Jewish people to die at the hands of the Nazis, but they were some of the first to be murdered in the pursuit of a policy that would become unequivocally annihilatory., In the weeks that followed, the scale of this mass murder grew substantially, and in less than a month the targets of the Einsatzgruppen had moved on from military aged men to include women and children. By the end of the year more than a million men, women and children had been killed., While we have some degree of knowledge – albeit incomplete – about the deportations to death camps that ultimately followed, the history of those who were walked to their places of murder is far less clear. There is still no certainty about the total numbers involved. This lack of clarity isn’t helped by present-day populations who are often extremely reticent about dealing with – or even acknowledging – the historic crimes. I had heard about this before, but being confronted with it first-hand was chilling., In recent years, pioneering geophysicists and archaeologists have started to address this gap. By using their expertise to identify where some of the lost bodies might be, they are able to reveal something about what happened in these places, as well as to provide some degree of closure., Until recently I had been unaware of the number of these remaining mass graves. Knowing that from 1942 the Nazis embarked on a programme to disinter and destroy the remains within them, as part of a desperate attempt to conceal their crimes, I had naively assumed little was left. I was wrong., I was confronted with this in a direct way in a small wood on the edge of the Lithuanian town of Alytus. A few hundred yards from the carpark, Harry Jol and Phil Reeder – two of the geophysicists working with us on the programme – identified an unmarked grave. A small number of historic accounts indicated that shootings had been conducted at the site, but details were sketchy. The research conducted by Jol and Reeder’s team revealed that not only was there a pit where these accounts suggested one could be found, but it was far larger than anticipated. In fact, their scans suggested that beneath the damp and sun-dappled earth were tens of thousands of bodies. , It is a terrible reality, but just feet beneath forests, fields and beaches across eastern Europe are human bones. These acts of mass murder have little, if nothing, to do with the perception of the Holocaust as a product of systemised process. If anything, they are a more accurate reflection of its true, barbaric character., This is the ground the camps were figuratively built on. The fact that such a place – a mass grave of potentially tens of thousands – could exist, unmarked and unexplored in a modern European nation, is a profoundly disturbing thing. I believe, however, that it is something we need face up to.][It has been clear for a long time that this government is not interested in learning lessons from the Windrush scandal that ruined so many lives, including my own. So I’m not surprised that the home secretary, Suella Braverman, has decided not to implement key reforms that had previously been accepted., Among the changes that have been abandoned is a commitment to hold reconciliation events in which the people affected would have had the chance to talk to ministers and Home Office staff about the impact of the scandal on their lives. This is a huge missed opportunity – for the government to show that it is truly sorry, and for us to come together and have our experiences acknowledged., Like so many others, when this nightmare started, I felt as if I was the only one. Everyone was hiding, keeping it secret, not knowing what to do or who to turn to. Even people who were close friends were hiding it from each other. Gathering people together would have helped them to feel less alone, and that yes, this is going to be with us for the rest of our lives, but at least we have a forum to talk about how we feel and how we’ve been able to move on. It would have been a form of therapy., In also abandoning a commitment to create the post of a migrants’ commissioner to identify problems with the immigration system as well as a pledge to increase the powers of the independent chief inspector of borders and immigration, Braverman is making it very clear that the government does not care about immigrants – past, present, or future., The experience of being told that I wasn’t a citizen of this country left me terrified. I came here from Barbados in 1963, when I was eight years old. I’ve been working here since I got my first paper round near our home in Bedford, at the age of 12. I spent my teenage years listening to the new sounds that were coming over from the US and the Caribbean; seeing Mary Quant and the miniskirt and all that. I had my three children here, and have paid taxes all my working life., Then, after 52 years, to have to prove that I had the right to be here, and to know that I could be sent to Yarl’s Wood detention centre and deported any day – it’s not something you recover from. It leaves a wound that is there continually, and that keeps being reopened with every new thing that happens. This latest announcement just confirms that the government has no real understanding of what people like me have been through., In my case, after losing my job and applying for others in 2014, it came to light that I was officially classed as an “illegal immigrant”. It was an enormous shock. My Barbados passport, which had my stamp showing I had indefinite leave to remain, had been lost in the post a few years earlier., I used up all my savings getting lawyers to prove my status. I was unable to work or travel, which meant I could not visit my mother in Barbados or attend her funeral. I got into rent arrears and narrowly avoided eviction. And, because of all the stress, I have developed a long-term health condition., Despite everything I’ve been through, I still consider myself one of the lucky ones. I’ve been able to come out on the better side of this, thanks to my faith in God. I have received compensation, and I do now have a British passport – although it’s only dated from 2018, as though I dropped out of the sky into this country., But a lot of people are still waiting for compensation – many of them died without ever receiving it, or after being deported. What about all of them? I’m very aware that if I hadn’t had boxes of paperwork going back to the 1970s, I might not be here at all., Whether it’s Grenfell or Windrush, this is a government that seems to like writing reports, but not actually implementing what comes out of them. They need to have more consideration for the citizens of the UK. It’s pointless saying you want to learn lessons and then reneging on every promise. It feels as though there’s no justice., I always loved England, and I do still love it, as bad as things have been. But I don’t feel safe here any more. This whole experience has left me feeling very vulnerable. And the stress doesn’t go away. My right to stay here has to be renewed next year, and I don’t know what will happen. How can any of us trust a system that shows us its true colours like this time and time again? The only thing I feel sure of is that you cannot rely on anything they say.][The most shocking thing Madonna has ever done, as she once said herself, is just to keep on publicly being Madonna. She won’t give up. She won’t fade away. She won’t be shamed, at the age of 64, into retirement; she is still jumping on every TikTok trend, still pumping out sexually suggestive clips to promote her upcoming world tour., And if there’s something faintly spooky now about the tautness of her face, then she is arguably doing what she has to do to remain relevant and marketable inside an industry that holds women to impossible standards. Admittedly, it all looks faintly exhausting. But the pressure to keep on keeping on at whatever we do, in the teeth of ageist assumptions, is coming for us all soon enough., Retirement age is rising across Europe. The French are revolting, once again, over plans to raise their pension age from 62 to 64. Germany is moving its own to 67, with talk of ultimately raising it to 70. The chancellor Jeremy Hunt wouldn’t be out of step if, as reported, he speeds up existing plans to raise the British state pension age to 68. The pattern of working life is changing everywhere, and yet attitudes to older people at work lag oddly behind. We’ll all have to wait longer to claim a pension, but what happens if we can’t hang on to our jobs for that long?, The average age to which Britons can expect to live without suffering disabling illness is a shockingly young 60.9 for women and a scarcely higher 62.4 for men, with the poorest being most at risk of getting sick. But even if you stay healthy, you may still have to navigate the kind of kneejerk assumptions about being over the hill that (according to research by the former government business champion for older workers, Ros Altmann) ensure women’s careers begin to stall at only 45, and men’s at 55. More and more of us will shortly be fighting a workplace culture that apparently can’t see 59-year-olds as vigorous or capable of learning new things, any more than some people can cope with a 64-year-old woman being sexual., Few women would dream of going to Madonna-like lengths to hang on in there. But do we dye our greying hair, or keep a careful eye on what younger colleagues in the office are wearing and saying and thinking, so as not to stand out too much? Do we panic about what people will think if our menopausal minds go briefly blank in a meeting? Well, that’s another story., We do what we have to do, which is what makes it so disappointing that this week ministers rejected one proposal from the all-party women and equalities committee that may have helped to keep thousands of older women at the top of their professional game for longer: namely, making it illegal to discriminate against workers on the specific grounds of being menopausal., I completely understand the fear some older women have that over-pathologising menopause may just make some employers even more reluctant to hire them. If you spent your 20s working for men who wouldn’t promote women in case they (shock, horror) got pregnant, the prospect of battling assumptions about female biology all over again at 50 is enraging, especially as plenty of women do get through this time without breaking stride. But it’s now very clear some are being avoidably pushed out of work by temporary menopause-related illness., The committee, chaired by the Tory MP Caroline Nokes, noted that women who experienced at least one problematic menopausal symptom were 43% more likely to have left their job by 55 than those who didn’t, concluding that the current law doesn’t “serve or protect” women. It recommended making menopause a protected characteristic like age or race – which could also help embolden women to ask for flexible working or other helpful adjustments – plus a pilot scheme testing the usefulness of offering “menopause leave” for related health reasons., Over the past few months I’ve interviewed women for this newspaper who have suffered hormone-related symptoms from crippling anxiety, depression or brain fog to bleeding so heavy it left them scared to leave the house. Time and time again, they had either left jobs or adapted them to cope. Yet these were women who should have had a decade and more of working life ahead of them., All the old arguments for hanging on to younger women through their childbearing years – that it’s a waste of their talents and the future taxes they would pay to let them fall by the wayside – apply to older women too, especially given the government is actively trying to reverse a rise in over-50s retiring early. But ministers’ response was that creating menopause rights could discriminate against older men with long-term health conditions. If so, isn’t the answer to offer targeted help to these men too, so they too have a shot at working as long as the Treasury apparently now expects?, Shifting the goalposts on retirement is relatively easy for chancellors, knowing they’ll probably be long gone before the impact is felt. But shifting assumptions about when and why employees are past their sell-by date is harder, and this week ministers missed a chance to do so. Tough as it is, we all need to get ready for a longer working life. But we can’t unless employers, in turn, are ready for us., <em><strong>Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.</strong></em>][The championing of the north by the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, is a noble cause, but his past support for HS2 was a dreadful mistake. From the start, it was clear that the staggering £100bn cost – more than all other rail projects put together – would cripple all British rail investments everywhere. So it has proved., The latest rumoured HS2 salami-slice proposed stopping the service at the new Elizabeth Line station at Old Oak Common – which the chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, has now denied. This is a shame, because it makes sense to offer a better east-west London service than running another service through Euston., But all this really emphasises is that HS2 is only about London. Had Burnham and his fellow mayors opposed HS2 in favour of local rail, they would have won, and this nonsense would have stopped. At it is, he was dazzled by getting fast to London, while Mancunians are left gazing at empty Avanti platforms., Burnham has fallen back on pleading for ever more public money, which he knows he will not get but can at least blame the Tories for not giving. At this week’s Convention of the North conference, he applauded a German minister for his country’s generosity to former east German lands after the 1989 reunification. Why could London’s government not do the same for the north? , Of the generosity there is no doubt. Vast sums were tipped by Berlin into the former communist territories in a desperate bid to bolster its crippled economy and stop migration westwards. About €2tr, the equivalent of £70bn a year, was transferred into the east between 1990 and 2014. This was overwhelmingly in direct welfare payments – virtually a universal basic income – and grants to local governments. Just 9% was in business subsidies. , There is no question this bounty rescued the east from disaster. The city centres of Leipzig and Dresden now look handsome and prosperous, the latter’s dazzling Frauenkirche Lutheran church restored at last from British bombing. Yet still the east has trailed. In 2018, the unemployment rate was 6.9% to the west’s 4.8%. Its productivity has improved but is still well behind.No eastern company appeared on Germany’s stock exchange index. This is reflected politically. The east’s population gets older as young people drift west. In 2020, 91% of western Germans thought democracy is the “best suited form of government”, but only 78% of eastern Germans felt the same. , Whether such heavy regional subsidies benefit an economy or merely embed dependency is controversial. Britain’s Barnett-formula block grants to Scotland and Wales may boost spending power but seem not to fuel economic recovery. They can build infrastructure, but that does not create startup businesses or jobs in the creative and knowledge sectors. It does not hold young people back from the enterprise and bright lights of distant cities. Moving Germany’s capital to Berlin was critical in aiding the east’s reintegration because it brought new blood to the city. Likewise Dublin’s extraordinary growth over the past half-century has elevated Ireland into one of Europe’s richest states per capita. , One lesson that Burnham rightly draws from Germany is how regions should be governed. To prosper, a city must be allowed to be master of its fate. After reunification, the former East Germany’s local authorities were slashed and modernised from 7,000 to nearer 2,500. They were given powers over local taxation, education and health, with central block grants free of ring-fencing. This is the exact opposite of Britain’s contempt for localism. Local councils are stripped of virtually all discretion and expected to deliver on central targets tied to detailed grants fixed by formula. These funds have steadily declined since 2010, leaving local councils with little to do but tread water to avoid drowning., There is no doubt that big cities hold the keys to growth for modern regional economies. They suck enterprise and creative talent from their surrounding hinterlands, but they in turn are sucked by the magnetism of even bigger cities, particularly capitals. Public money may help, but the magnet seems to be some critical mix of creative activity, cultural assets, lifestyle glamour and tourist appeal., Famously, civic appeal lies in what children say when told they are moving house, or what an executive’s best friend says over lunch. The answer is not a government grant but smart shops, museums and concert halls, gentrified neighbourhoods and nightlife. It was typified by Bradford’s chief executive, Kersten England, who once declared the key to its future lay in making its tumbledown centre the “Shoreditch of Yorkshire”., The only way to counter the pull of London is to jolt the north out of its inferiority complex. Yes it needs faster local trains – desperately and now – as well as smarter leadership. But it also needs magnetism. Moving Germany’s capital was indeed drastic and had history on its side, but, as any visitor to that city knows, the impact has been galvanising., Manchester needs that. Moving the House of Commons to the city – even if just for the duration of a parliament – would not be the same, but it would be sensational. It would stamp the north on the national and international map. The great town hall would make a perfect parliament house – and the Northern Quarter and Ancoats a new Soho and Shoreditch. Such a gesture would do more than any levelling-up grant or high-speed trip to London. It would signal confidence in a new regeneration. As of now, nothing else will.][Pity Labour right now: feeling the righteous heat of Brexit failure, needing to appease ever more vociferous remainers, but desperate not to alarm “red wall” voters., So we are offered vague words from Labour’s David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, of better connections between the EU and “tarnished” Britain and aspirations about joint talking shops, when the reality is that faced with a continually chaotic UK, the EU will simply protect its members and enjoy the schadenfreude., What we are being offered now is another sticking plaster for the deepest running sore of British politics. As we mark 50 years since we joined the then EEC and three years since we left, isn’t it high time we took stock of what has become of Britain’s sorry relationship with the EU and of us, the British citizens? , Let’s start with some home truths. Europe was only ever a partially democratic project. It was deeply contradictory in nature. Ted Heath took us in without a vote; we only voted to stay in after this fait accompli. The public was offered its first slice of battenberg cakeism – everything was to be gained from this club and nothing lost. Instinctively, though, people knew that powers and decisions were being handed over. And for more than 40 years they had no say on it., In the same year as the 1975 referendum, an influential report by the Trilateral Commission claimed the growing social and economic problems of the US, Japan and Europe stemmed from an “excess of democracy”. Politicians were too amenable to the whims of voters and would spend too much, causing inflation. The people could not be trusted – but central bankers could. Thus the democratic deficit was deepened., As a consequence, as Helen Thompson suggests in her majestic book Disorder, “Brexit was, in the long term, most likely unavoidable”. There was bound to be a clash between the interests of technocrats and democrats. Being in Europe, by definition, meant the loss of some control. But that conversation was too difficult, and the people, after all, could not be trusted. The seeds of Faragism were being sown., The deceit, once created, had to be maintained. With every new treaty that ceded more power to the EU – sometimes for good social or environmental ends, often to embedded neoliberalism – Thatcher, Major, Blair, Brown and then Cameron all promised referendums, but would wriggle free from the commitment., And all this time the nation polarised. Deindustrialisation, the political project of Thatcherism to hollow out the unions and any semblance of effective class solidarity, bred bitterness and resentment. New Labour, because it never sufficiently levelled up, eventually rolled the pitch for Nigel Farage., By supporting the extension of the EU to 27 nations and not adopting the transitional immigration rules other countries took up, Labour handed the initiative to the Brexiters. In New Labour’s cynicism, it saw a quick productivity fix that boosted tax revenues through easily imported eastern European labour., It never reckoned with the backwash from the already precarious people for whom all this was too much too quickly, economically, socially and culturally – especially when there was no enforcement of the minimum wage, so little social housing and so much pressure on the NHS and school places. Labour refused to make the case for immigration and just hoped “growth” would cover the tensions. And poisonously, it based New Labour on its humiliation of old Labour, also known as the red wall., The referendum cemented the divide. An adversarial two-party system that ignored huge chunks of voters eventually destabilised the country and both parties, just as it had in Scotland, two years before. But the party tribalists couldn’t learn. Instead of forging a deal that looked like the 51% to 49% result, they pursued their own factional interests. Eventually, of course, the country tired of it all and backed the strong man who could “get Brexit done”. We live in its hard wake. Inevitably, like everything in our post-democracy, it unravelled., The tragedy, of course, is that we need to belong to institutions that go beyond nations as the only hope of dealing with climate chaos, globalised finance, multinational corporations, mass immigration and turbulent geopolitics. But that need must be balanced with nation and place. There is no socialism in one country, no globalised cosmopolitan nirvana and no Davos on Thames. Instead, there must be a way of managing the challenges, tensions and paradoxes we face., It is our political system that forces bad binary choices on us. Today, Labour, the party that ignored leavers now ignores remainers. The Tories, eternally trying to spring the Faragist trap, see his Reform UK vote climb again. Devoid of Boris Johnson, the only politician who can withstand Farage’s populist touch, the pressure to bend to the politics of hard Brexit remains irresistible. The polls are encouraging now, but something like the 2019 Tory upsurge could happen again, as the right consolidates around an anti-Europe, anti-immigration agenda, retaining some of the red wall. Whether it’s enough to deny Labour a majority remains to be seen. But the most dynamic force in UK politics continues to be rightwing populism., Farage tweeted recently that “Britain is broke”. He should know. Brexit tipped us over the edge, but for Brexit to have happened, the country must have been broken. The biggest beneficiaries of such desolation could be him and his populist, scapegoating anti-politics. Only a new negotiated politics allows a serious and deep conversation about what sort of country we want to be and how we govern ourselves. , It is more than six years since the Brexit vote, but everything and nothing has changed: we have same electoral system, the same cartel parties, the same adversarial and short-term, zero-sum politics. It’s “blue walls” v red walls, as if the country, its people and its future really were that binary., Brexit was a project instigated by people who wanted to take our country in the wrong direction, and the fact that they won still hasn’t given us anywhere near enough pause for thought about why, and whether we are anywhere near a politics that could make people feel connected, and repel the populists., Labour means well, but it’s offering sticking plasters – and sticking plasters will not do.][I used to watch an unhealthy amount of TV. A minimum of 24 shows per week for the best part of two years, to be precise, when I worked on the Guardian’s TV desk., As part of the job, I had access to new television series ahead of time and bought subscriptions to all the streaming services. Word soon spread through my friendship groups and family WhatsApps: “Ammar has all the new TV shows.” Passwords soon followed., Growing up before streaming, when there was typically one telly per household, our viewing habits were common knowledge among those we lived with. My childhood was spent wrestling the remote away from my brother to switch over from Hollyoaks to The Simpsons. As a family, we watched EastEnders together. But now that we so often watch through our laptops and phones, there’s a danger that television becomes an isolated affair, curated through siloed profiles. Oddly, it’s a quirk of the streaming giant Netflix that has allowed us to buck that trend: the ability to share Netflix accounts with people beyond your household. Sharing a password – and, by extension, our viewing habits – with a friend, or family member, or neighbour, has become an unusual form of connection. <br/><br/>Now it looks as though these fleeting bonds are under threat: Netflix has announced it will end sharing passwords across multiple households. No more password-sharing as a small act of trust and intimacy between non-cohabiting couples. No more being able to check whether your girlfriend skipped ahead of the show you’re supposed to be watching together on her night in. An end to the cold blow of changing the password on a shared account to lock your ex out of your viewing habits when things go sour. <br/>, Even in its most ephemeral guise, sharing accounts can be weirdly fun. I have lost count of the number of Airbnbs I have checked into around the world where the previous guest is still logged into their Netflix profile, allowing me a glimpse into their nightly viewing of the steamy scenes in Outlander, or their binge-watching of Cake Wars. Sometimes I might add a show of my own into the mix – communicating to them wherever they find themselves now and probably prompting them to quickly change their password., I have long shared a Netflix account with my dad. Since my mum passed away in 2013, he has been living alone and our shared TV streaming platform has been a small means of me checking in (OK, spying) on him. I would sporadically click on his profile and see that he was watching Mad Men (fun), or The Queen’s Gambit (zeitgeisty), or Naked Attraction (I didn’t want to know). When I started seeing more Bollywood romances pop up, it was a sign that he had met someone., Without password-sharing, I’ll have to boot my freeloading dad off my account. Our viewing will become more boundaried and private. Without shared TV, we will lose that playful connection. Others will lose this practical shortcut for cutting down on the ballooning cost of keeping up with the latest shows, and won’t get to experience those chance encounters or lingering friendships through forgotten password-lending. I’m still on an ex-boss’s Disney+ account, for instance, and I shall forever be grateful to him for keeping me around., Private watching keeps our choices personal but TV needn’t be serious. We should celebrate our guilty pleasures and we should be able to share them with each other. Just perhaps not Naked Attraction with our dads.][You could see Covid-19 as an empathy test. Who was prepared to suffer disruption and inconvenience for the sake of others, and who was not? The answer was often surprising. I can think, for instance, of five prominent environmentalists who denounced lockdowns, vaccines and even masks as intolerable intrusions on our liberties, while proposing no meaningful measures to prevent transmission of the virus. Four of them became active spreaders of disinformation., If environmentalism means anything, it’s that our damaging gratifications should take second place to the interests of others. Yet these people immediately failed the test, placing their own convenience above the health and lives of others., Now there are even fewer excuses, as we have become more aware of the costs of inaction. One of the justifications for selfishness was that liberating the virus would build herd immunity. But we now have plenty of evidence suggesting that exposure does not strengthen our immune system, but may weaken it. The virus attacks and depletes immune cells, ensuring that for some people, immune dysfunction persists for months after infection., We also know that, with every new exposure, we are more likely to suffer adverse effects. A massive study in the US found that the risk of brain, nerve, heart, lung, blood, kidney, insulin and muscular disorders accumulates with every reinfection. The impacts of long Covid, according to health metrics researchers, are “as severe as the long-term effects of traumatic brain injury”. Now that we know how the virus attacks our cells, “traumatic brain injury” looks less like an analogy than a description. The outcomes can be devastating, ranging from extreme fatigue and breathlessness to brain fog, psychotic disorders, memory loss, epilepsy and dementia., We are all playing Covid roulette. The next infection could be the one that permanently disables you. I’ve been hit three times so far, and feel lucky still to be active. But I’ve lost a little every time: stamina, lung capacity, sleep, general fitness, however diligently I’ve exercised since. In all three cases, it seems, the infection has come from school. For families with school-age children, the chamber turns more often than for those without. Yet, three years after the pandemic began, the government still does almost nothing to make schools safe., There’s a powerful argument that just as cholera was stopped by cleaning the water, Covid will be stopped by cleaning the air. The virus thrives in badly ventilated, shared spaces – especially classrooms, where students sit together for long periods. One study found that mechanical ventilation systems in classrooms reduce the infection risk by 74%., The importance of ventilation and filtration is not lost on our lords and masters. Parliament now has a sophisticated air filter system, incorporating electrostatic precipitators. According to the contractor that fitted them, they ensure airborne viruses and bacteria are “kept to an absolute minimum within the space”. The same goes for the government departments where ministers work. At the World Economic Forum in Davos this month, there were filtration systems in every room, in some cases protecting politicians who have denied them to their own people. It’s almost as if they believe their lives are more important than ours., The clean air standards rich and powerful people demand for themselves should be universal, rolled out to all schools and other public buildings. Instead, while private schools have been able to invest in ventilation and filtration, state schools, many of which are close to bankruptcy, rely on government disbursements that are strictly rationed by a series of nonsensical conditions. It’s another classic false economy. The extra costs of healthcare caused by repeated waves of infection and the long – perhaps lifelong – impacts for many of those affected must greatly outweigh the investment in cleaner air., But instead of taking simple and effective actions – proper (N95) masks in public places, filtration in shared spaces – we have steadily normalised a mass disabling agent. It’s likely, eventually, to reduce the number of quality years for almost everyone. Those who suffer the extreme version of this disablement, long Covid, are treated as an embarrassment we would prefer to forget., You need only gently propose that we might return to wearing masks on public transport to provoke hundreds of people on social media to bray “freedom!” and denounce you as a tyrant. Against their tiniest of freedoms – keeping their faces uncovered on trains and buses – the trolls weigh freedom from disability and even death, and decide that their right to breathe germs on to other people is the indispensable liberty., These are the people who, with their threats and conspiracy theories, may have helped drive Jacinda Ardern, the politician who arguably protected more people from the virus than any other, out of office. They are the people who, in some cases, have abused mask wearers in the street, and doctors and nurses in hospitals. If they have not yet been infected, they attribute their good fortune to “natural immunity”, rather than not getting out very much. An Old Testament ableism pervades the ideology: those who are ill deserve to be ill., I’m not suggesting that everyone who fails to wear a mask on public transport fails the empathy test. That would now condemn almost the entire population. But, without direction from the government and the cultural shift this could provoke, even the kindest people end up behaving as if they have no regard for others., “Move on”, “get over it”: these are the incantations of people who seek to shed responsibility for their actions. It’s what Tony Blair said after the Iraq war. It’s what Boris Johnson said after he was caught repeatedly breaking the rules. Of course we urgently want it to be over. But it isn’t. The virus is now embedded, and will continue to mutate to avoid our defences, grinding down – unless we treat each other with respect and demand universal standards of clean indoor air – our immune systems and our health, until everyone’s life is a shadow of what it might have been., Do we really mean to sit and watch as this infection encroaches on our freedom to be well, brutal winter after brutal winter? Or do we step in where the government has failed, and normalise concern for the lives of others once more? Like all the other moral challenges we face, this is now on us.][In a country so grossly unequal, nothing is fair. As the government plans to raise the state pension age from 66 to 68 at a much earlier date than previously announced, it looks increasingly unjust to pay out the pension at the same rate and at the same age for everyone, regardless of wildly differing circumstances., A universal state retirement age means wealthy people will receive payments for many years more than the poor. The tyranny of averages conceals vast social class differences within Britain. Men in Richmond-on-Thames will, on average, live healthily until the age of 71, while for men in Blackpool, a healthy life expectancy is just 53 years, meaning they will wait in bad health, unable to work for 13 years, before qualifying for their pension at 66. In Blackpool’s Bloomfield ward, reports LancsLive, the average life expectancy of men is just 67 years and three months. That means many will never make it to drawing a pension if the government’s plan goes ahead. Prof Sir Michael Marmot, whose groundbreaking research analyses the effect of poverty, deprivation and deadening jobs on health and longevity, tells me: “If 68 becomes the new pension age, 60% of men never reach that age without a disability that prevents them working.”, Age UK says that 3.5 million people aged between 50 and 64 are out of the workforce already. “Many of them [are] in poor health and with few savings by the time they reach state pension age.” Others are caring for loved ones without social care, all while being frail themselves. Some of that missing workforce could be helped back into jobs if they had enough support, but many will never work again, instead being left miserably poor, waiting for pensions., Inequality in Britain has just been ratcheted up yet another notch, as annual figures from the Office for National Statistics this week show incomes of the bottom fifth falling, (with wages down by 7.5%) and the richest fifth’s rising, yet again (with wages up by 7.8%)., Crude averages often disguise individual hardship, especially when inequality within an age cohort is greater than between cohorts. Rising life expectancy, a feature of my whole lifetime, is now slowing, and diverging further between classes. For poor women, it’s actually falling back. Still, the chancellor uses convenient average increased longevity as a reason to raise the pension age and cut mushrooming pension costs, which take 42% of the social security budget. Soaring numbers of older people will have to be supported by shrinking numbers of the young, as the birthrate of future taxpayers plunges. It is true that for the first time in history, older people are the group least likely to be poor. But this is a useless guide to making policy on pensions when some old people are very poor., The chancellor tries to have it both ways as the cost of the pension bill is swollen by the Tories’ expensive triple lock, guaranteeing pensions keep rising faster than other benefits, up by 10% this April, an inflation-proofing denied to striking public servants. Is that prudent, just to buy pensioners’ votes? What a perverse view of the future to give a triple lock even to wealthy pensioners who don’t need it, when Marmot points out that struggling families and children have been stripped of support in the last 12 years, amounting to 20% of their income., Past pension age myself, yet in well-paid work that enhances my life, I am astonished by the un-needed benefits lavished on me. The most valuable item I carry everywhere is my freedom pass, worth thousands each year in free transport. Why am I entitled to a pension before I need it, or free prescriptions and eye tests? Above all, why don’t I pay national insurance? Unlike someone exhausted from a lifetime of back-breaking, mind-numbing toil, I don’t yearn for retirement – I dread it. It makes no sense to treat me the same as others living in hardship, too low-paid to have amassed savings or home ownership, just because we share a date of birth but little else in our life’s circumstances., If older people are becoming too heavy a financial burden for young taxpayers to bear, start by making those who can afford it contribute more. We own the most property, and we should pay taxes on it. The social care catastrophe, leaving so many frail people dying in neglect or filling a hospital bed reluctantly, needs funding by those who have accumulated assets in our comfortable working lives, not triple-locking the pensions of people such as me with a 10% raise denied to public servants., This government’s policies spring from their own narrow life experiences, without empathy, understanding or interest in lives less lucky than theirs. Here’s Spectator writer Ross Clark’s take on raising the pension age: “Go the full hog and jack it up to 70 immediately,” he writes. “Under the proposed changes it could mean me having to work – <em>quelle horreur!</em> – a full extra year. Except that I wasn’t planning to retire anyway, at any age – or at least not until I am rendered incapable by age. My inspiration comes from the Rolling Stones, still leaping about on stage in their late 70s, rather than all these librarians and pen-pushers swanning off in their 50s, claiming to be too fagged out to continue any longer.”, It’s time he and his government took a trip to Blackpool, taking with them the work of Michael Marmot.][If the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, chose to upgrade Germany’s military assistance to Ukraine this week, it was only as a result of the extreme amount of pressure that had been building up in recent days., Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine has thrust upon Germany the necessity of some serious self-analysis. It has shattered many certainties, including even that most iron-clad tenet of postwar German history, which maintained that no conflict could ever be resolved militarily. Germany’s famous creed “Wandel durch Handel”, change through trade<em>,</em> was directly derived from this thinking that had permeated virtually every part of its society., Keep this in mind when remembering that Germany maintained its lonely support for the highly controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline project until days before the beginning of Russia’s invasion, casting aside repeated criticisms from eastern Europe, the US and many western European countries even as Moscow was already massing its troops on Ukraine’s borders in preparation for war., The events of 24 February 2022 dealt a death blow to Germany’s well-practised refusal to acknowledge the nature of Vladimir Putin’s Russia. Up until that point, Russian military atrocities in Syria, its wars in Georgia and eastern Ukraine, and even brazenly public crimes such as the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London or the assassination of a Georgian national considered an enemy by Putin’s regime in Berlin in 2019 had failed to provoke any meaningful change in Germany’s behaviour., Considering all that, the country has truly come a very long way over the course of less than a year. Its public has moved from rejecting sending weapons to Ukraine by a nearly two-to-one margin to a majority in favour of it. And let me be clear: Germany has provided a lot more than anyone following last year’s exhausting debates about its contributions could be led to believe., This confusion, in turn, is a result of Germany’s Social Democrat-led government’s communication style. Anyone trying to understand Scholz’s motives and aims in all this would be ill-advised to ask members of his own governing coalition of Social Democrats, Greens and free-market liberals. The tedious task of staking political claims is left to others such as the Social Democratic party chairman, Lars Klingbeil, who notably remarked that his country should be a “leading power”. Scholz, on the other hand, has refrained from anything resembling leadership at the recent meeting of Ukraine’s supporters at the US military base in Ramstein, failing in particular to forge a western alliance for coordinated shipments of battle tanks to Ukraine., By continuing instead to hide behind Washington and rely on his mantra of Germany not “going it alone”, Scholz has accepted doing considerable damage to the uniquely important transatlantic relationship, not to mention further eroding eastern European trust in Berlin. The Baltic states and Poland have long considered Germany an element of instability. Their strong misgivings about Nord Stream 2, fully legitimate even before Russia invaded Ukraine, were widely derided in Berlin, and not only by Scholz’s Social Democrats., Now, the chancellery’s spin doctors are pulling out all the stops to frame a late and politically costly decision as a stroke of political and strategic genius. Not only did Scholz not hide behind the Americans, they contend, but his machinations resulted in locking up an even greater number of tanks going to Ukraine., One major hole in this argument is that it conveniently leaves out why this cunning move was never shared with Scholz’s coalition partners at home. Among their ranks, a different story was playing out over the weekend as frustration over the disappointing Ramstein meeting gave rise to some whispered questions over whether continued cooperation was possible with a chancellor who appeared so unrelenting in his quest to upset Germany’s allies., As a matter of fact, Scholz’s inscrutable political manoeuvring probably reflects the equally unclear positions of many Germans. Today’s German society emerged as the country, protected at least in its western half by Nato’s nuclear umbrella, flourished into a global economic powerhouse. Germans began considering history essentially over and started lecturing their protective powers, most prominently the US, with shallow pacifist slogans., Germany’s longstanding tradition of hair-trigger anti-American sentiment facilitated this move just as it did – and does – inform its almost romantic view of Russia. Putin speaking in German at the Bundestag in 2001 was more than enough for most Germans to overlook the brutality of his methods, which he was doing less than nothing to hide. After his speech, Putin received standing ovations, all while Russian troops were busy levelling Chechnyan cities., Russia’s genocidal war in Ukraine has catapulted Germany out of its comfort zone. A charitable interpretation of this would be that Berlin may yet complete its long and arduous journey towards the global west, including assuming responsibilities that go beyond financial and humanitarian aid. In this scenario, Scholz could be understood as a moderating force helping Germans through a profound reality shock while gently moving them towards a point where they can process the changes around them., The obvious flipside of this is that Germany can move further west only because it failed to do so before. Thus, Scholz’s tentativeness looks like a desperate attempt to delay, if not fully prevent, decoupling from a Russia that seems unable to deliver anything but death and destruction. A Russia that must lose this war – a simple demand which Scholz, 11 months into this war, has yet to make in public.][Did my father know that his death was imminent? After he was wheeled back to my parents’ flat in Edinburgh for his last Christmas five years ago, delusion seemed to prevail. He was getting better, he reassured me; then aged 72, he insisted would make it to his 80s. But his eyes seemed to suggest otherwise: there was something about how they welled up as I blared Edward Elgar’s Nimrod from the living room speakers. He loved that variation. My mother hasn’t been able to listen to it since, because it’s one of those emotional landmines that grief lays after a bereavement. Why stand on it, if you have the choice?, Just over two weeks later, he was dead, but he wouldn’t have felt disappointment in that moment of finality. Sometimes I wonder if he could hear his family in that hospice, whispering their love, or the baritone notes of the Bruce Springsteen songs we played. Before he fell ill, he used to loop around his armchair, clicking his fingers and roaring out the chorus as he listened to the Boss. His eyes seemed to moisten in those final moments, too. But was this a silent emotional response to his family wishing him farewell, or just another symptom of a human body shutting down for good?, It’s half a decade since my father died, and these questions have clearly gnawed at my subconscious. For a long time after his final breath, he appeared in my dreams dreading death, panic-stricken, warning that he was going the way of my grandfather, who had died six months earlier. He was nothing like that in reality – in front of me, at least, he appeared upbeat, perhaps because despite being given a terminal diagnosis of advanced prostate cancer, and consistently responding poorly to treatment, he never really believed it would happen. Did my dreams hint at how I thought he should have felt, or what I really believed was going on in his head? Or would Sigmund Freud conclude that I was projecting fears about my own mortality?, It seems difficult to believe that it has been five years since that moment, because – even now – I haven’t abandoned that childhood self-deception that parents are immortal deities. Having a dad just seems a permanent part of life’s architecture. Now, with every passing year, he becomes more of a historical persona, something belonging to the past, predating the sorts of grand upheavals that he would have yearned to discuss, like the pandemic or the invasion of Ukraine., Yet he also remains disconcertingly present: his scraggly combover, pale Celtic skin peppered with brown freckles, and silver-capped teeth as vivid in my mind as if I’d seen him an hour ago. My mum’s home number remains “Folks” in my phone. It’s his mannerisms and habits that remain seared on my brain more than anything else: snoring in his armchair with a book about the American revolution on his lap, bellowing as he suddenly lurched forward on the sofa when Everton missed a goal, muttering a profanity when a can of bitter that he tossed at the wastebasket missed., There’s nothing exceptional about losing your father as an adult. Some of my friends lost theirs as children, a searing experience. That applied to my dad, too: his sailor father had survived Nazi bombs but succumbed to a heart attack and was buried at sea somewhere near Cape Verde, off the west coast of Africa. At the age of six, my dad was briskly informed by his mother and packed off to school. That loss defined his childhood; in truth, his death doesn’t define my adulthood, long independent from my parents. But I’m still struck by how, years after he was cremated and his ashes were planted beneath a tree in Sheffield, I don’t have a proper vocabulary to talk about it.<strong> </strong>Whatever angle I take to address this lack – that it’s been 130,000 years since the first human burial; that I have several friends who’ve suffered bereavements; that my vocation is writing – it seems as though the universal experience of loss should be easy to describe, and yet it isn’t., We avoid talking about death, of course, for understandable reasons, but that doesn’t make it a healthy way of dealing with it. We fear it for ourselves and for those we love. Loss is painful, but irreversible, so expending energy may seem like inviting hurt for no reward. For me, it’s become clearer why I’ve needed to process his final moments: so they don’t become the defining memory of who he was. With time, that moment of terminal decline has given way to the man who energetically sang along to the chorus of Bob Dylan’s Forever Young, or wolfed down a curry on a Saturday night, or wagged his finger as he denounced Tory and Labour politician alike (like father, like son)., But it’s clearer to me than ever that our culture needs to be far more accommodating when it comes to opening up about loss.<strong> </strong>Five years on, I’ve come to understand bereavement as a running theme in life that takes many forms, and not just with death. It’s felt when relationships end, or careers are terminated. Loss transcends cultural divisions and class distinctions, even though different circumstances mean its impact varies wildly. It does invite hurt to talk about it, but such pain is more corrosive if it’s suppressed. Perhaps the lack of vocabulary isn’t the problem: just saying something, anything, breaks a taboo that hurts us the most.]